InstantOn Spring Boot 3 with CRaC beta blog (#3324)
OpenLiberty/blogs: posts/2023-09-26-spring-boot-3-instant-on.adoc

:imagesdir: /
:url-prefix:
:url-about: /

Did you know you can containerize your Spring Boot applications to start up in milliseconds, without compromising on throughput, memory, development-production parity, or Java language features? And with little or no refactoring of the application code? Here’s how with Liberty 23.0.0.10-beta…

== Liberty InstantOn

The InstantOn capability in the Open Liberty runtime uses the IBM Semeru JDK and a Linux technology called link:https://criu.org/Main_Page[Checkpoint/Restore in Userspace] (CRIU) to take a checkpoint, or a point-in-time snapshot, of the application process. This checkpoint can then be restored very quickly to bring the application process back into the state it was in when the checkpoint was taken. The application can be restored multiple times because Open Liberty and the Semeru JDK preserve the uniqueness of each restored process in containers.  Each restored application process runs without first having to go through the whole startup sequence, saving up to 90% of startup time (depending on your application). InstantOn requires very little modification of your Java application to make this improvement happen.

> For more information about Liberty InstantOn see the link:/blog/2023/06/29/rapid-startup-instanton.html[How to package your cloud-native Java application for rapid startup] blog and link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/instanton.html[Faster startup for containerized applications with Open Liberty InstantOn] in the Open Liberty docs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about Liberty InstantOn, see the link:/blog/2023/06/29/rapid-startup-instanton.html[How to package your cloud-native Java application for rapid startup] blog and link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/instanton.html[Faster startup for containerized applications with Open Liberty InstantOn] in the Open Liberty docs.
```

== Spring Boot support for checkpoint/restore

> The Spring Framework version 6.1 release will integrate with link:https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/reference/6.1/integration/checkpoint-restore.html[JVM checkpoint/restore] by using the link:https://github.com/CRaC/org.crac[org.crac] project in order to allow capable systems to reduce the startup times of Spring-based Java applications. With the Liberty InstantOn 23.0.0.10-beta version a new `crac-1.3` feature can be configured to provide an implementation of the link:https://javadoc.io/doc/org.crac/crac/latest/index.html[org.crac API] that integrates with Liberty InstantOn. This allows Spring-based applications, including Spring Boot applications, to be deployed with Liberty InstantOn in order to achieve rapid startup times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Spring Framework version 6.1 release will integrate with link:https://docs.spring.io/spring-framework/reference/6.1/integration/checkpoint-restore.html[JVM checkpoint/restore] by using the link:https://github.com/CRaC/org.crac[org.crac] project to allow capable systems to reduce the startup times of Spring-based Java applications. With the Liberty InstantOn 23.0.0.10-beta version, you can configure a new `crac-1.3` feature to provide an implementation of the link:https://javadoc.io/doc/org.crac/crac/latest/index.html[org.crac API] that integrates with Liberty InstantOn. This allows Spring-based applications, including Spring Boot applications, to be deployed with Liberty InstantOn to achieve rapid startup times.
```

== Production-ready Liberty container images

New link:https://www.redhat.com/en/blog/introducing-red-hat-universal-base-image[Universal Base Image] container images are uploaded to the link:https://github.com/OpenLiberty/ci.docker/blob/main/docs/icr-images.md[IBM Container Registry] for each new release of Liberty. Starting with the 23.0.0.6 Liberty release, the Liberty UBI container images include the necessary prerequisites to checkpoint your applications with Liberty InstantOn. And now, starting with the 23.0.0.10-beta release, the UBI beta container image also includes the prerequisites to checkpoint your Spring Boot 3.2-based applications.

> This includes an implementation of the link:https://javadoc.io/doc/org.crac/crac/latest/index.html[`org.crac`] APIs with the Liberty beta feature `crac-1.3`. The `crac-1.3` feature along with the Spring Framework version 6.1 support for `org.crac` will allow you to checkpoint your Spring-based applications with Liberty InstantOn in order to achieve rapid startup times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This beta release includes an implementation of the link:https://javadoc.io/doc/org.crac/crac/latest/index.html[`org.crac`] APIs with the Liberty beta feature `crac-1.3`. The `crac-1.3` feature, along with the Spring Framework version 6.1 support for `org.crac`, allows you to checkpoint your Spring-based applications with Liberty InstantOn to achieve rapid startup times.
```

> The Liberty container images make it easy to produce InstantOn applications that are ready to deploy into production. An important benefit of using Liberty InstantOn is the ability to do a checkpoint of the application process inside the container without requiring the root user to be running the application process in the container. It is important, from a security perspective, to not run the application process in the container as the root user. This allows you to link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/instanton.html#_deploying_an_instanton_application_to_kubernetes_services[deploy your InstantOn container images] to existing Kubernetes services like AWS EKS and Azure EKS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Liberty container images make it easy to develop InstantOn applications that are ready to deploy into production. An important benefit of using Liberty InstantOn is the ability to do a checkpoint of the application process inside the container without requiring the root user to be running the application process in the container. It is important, from a security perspective, to avoid running the application process in the container as the root user. This allows you to link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/instanton.html#_deploying_an_instanton_application_to_kubernetes_services[deploy your InstantOn container images] to existing Kubernetes services like AWS EKS and Azure EKS.
```

== Spring Boot 3.2.0 example using Liberty InstantOn

This example uses the link:https://openliberty.io/guides/spring-boot.html[Containerizing, packaging, and running a Spring Boot application] Open Liberty guide to demonstrate using Liberty InstantOn with a Spring Boot 3.2.0-based application. The fastest way to get up and running is to clone the `cracSpringBoot` branch from the guide's GitHub repository:

[source,console]
----
git clone --branch cracSpringBoot https://github.com/openliberty/guide-spring-boot.git
cd guide-spring-boot/finish
----

> The `cracSpringBoot` branch updates the guide to use the Open Liberty beta and Spring Boot version 3.2.0-M1 which contains the initial support of `orc.crac` for Spring Boot applications. In order to build and run the example Spring Boot application you must be using Java 17 or higher.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `cracSpringBoot` branch updates the guide to use the Open Liberty beta and Spring Boot version 3.2.0-M1 , which contains the initial support of `orc.crac` for Spring Boot applications. To build and run the example Spring Boot application, you must be using Java 17 or higher.
```

> After cloning the `cracSpringBoot` branch of the guide's repository, the first step is to build the Spring Boot application. Building the application is done by running the `mvnw` command provided with the project `finish/` folder:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After cloning the `cracSpringBoot` branch of the guide's repository, the first step is to build the Spring Boot application. Build the application by running the `mvnw` command provided with the project `finish/` folder:
```

[source,console]
----
./mvnw package
----

After building the Spring Boot application, the next step is to containerize it. We focus here on changes to containerize the application with Liberty InstantOn. If you want more information about how to best containerize Spring Boot applications with Open Liberty, read through the link:https://openliberty.io/guides/spring-boot.html[Containerizing, packaging, and running a Spring Boot application] guide.

> In order to build the application container image with InstantOn you must be able to either run a privileged container or grant the container image build engine the necessary link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/instanton.html#linux-capabilities[Linux capabilities] to do the checkpoint.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To build the application container image with InstantOn, you must be able to either run a privileged container or grant the container image build engine the necessary link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/instanton.html#linux-capabilities[Linux capabilities] to do the checkpoint.
```

=== Enabling the crac-1.3 Liberty feature

> Liberty is composed of features that you enable depending on the requirements of your application. In order to use Liberty's implementation of `org.crac` the Liberty feature `crac-1.3` must be enabled in the Liberty configuration. For this example, we can do that by copying in the `src/main/liberty/config/crac.xml` file into the container image with the following Dockerfile command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Liberty is composed of features that you enable according to the requirements of your application. To use Liberty's implementation of `org.crac`, you must enable the `crac-1.3` feature in the Liberty configuration. For this example, we can do that by copying in the `src/main/liberty/config/crac.xml` file into the container image with the following Dockerfile command:
```

.Dockerfile
[source]
----
COPY src/main/liberty/config/crac.xml /config/configDropins/defaults
----

The `crac.xml` Liberty configuration file enables the `crac-1.3` feature with the following content:

.crac.xml
[source,xml]
----
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<server description="Enable the org.crac API">

    <featureManager>
        <feature>crac-1.3</feature>
    </featureManager>

</server>

----

=== Building with Podman

> With Podman the container image build engine can be granted the necessary Linux capabilities in order to perform the application checkpoint during the container image build. This allows you to run the `checkpoint.sh` script as a `RUN` instruction as specified in the `Dockerfile.podman` file. This is done as the last instruction of the `Dockerfile.podman` file like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Podman, the container image build engine can be granted the necessary Linux capabilities to checkpoint the application  during the container image build. This allows you to run the `checkpoint.sh` script as a `RUN` instruction, as specified in the `Dockerfile.podman` file. This is the last instruction of the `Dockerfile.podman` file, as shown in the following example:
```

.Dockerfile.podman
[source]
----
...
RUN configure.sh
RUN checkpoint.sh afterAppStart
----

> In order to grant the necessary capabilities to the Podman container image build engine, the following command must be run as root or with `sudo`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To grant the necessary capabilities to the Podman container image build engine, run the following command as root or with `sudo`:
```

.build-instanton-podman.sh
[source,console]
----
sudo podman build \
  -f Dockerfile.podman \
  -t springboot \
  --cap-add=CHECKPOINT_RESTORE \
  --cap-add=SYS_PTRACE\
  --cap-add=SETPCAP \
  --security-opt seccomp=unconfined .
----

> You can run the above command or run the provided script `scripts/build-instanton-podman.sh` to build the application container image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can run the previous command or run the provided `scripts/build-instanton-podman.sh` script to build the application container image.
```

> During the build the last thing done is to run the `checkpoint.sh` using the `afterAppStart` option. This causes the checkpoint to happen after the application has been started.  See link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/instanton.html#beforeAppStart[when to make a checkpoint] for more information on the checkpoint options.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During the build, the last thing done is to run the `checkpoint.sh` script by using the `afterAppStart` option. This causes the checkpoint to happen after the application is started.  See link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/instanton.html#beforeAppStart[when to make a checkpoint] for more information on the checkpoint options.
```

2023-09-06T21:06:18.768Z DEBUG 118 --- [ecutor-thread-1] o.s.c.support.DefaultLifecycleProcessor  : Bean 'applicationTaskExecutor' completed its stop procedure
2023-09-06T21:06:18.769Z DEBUG 118 --- [ecutor-thread-1] o.s.c.support.DefaultLifecycleProcessor  : Stopping beans in phase 2147482623
2023-09-06T21:06:18.771Z DEBUG 118 --- [ecutor-thread-1] o.s.c.support.DefaultLifecycleProcessor  : Bean 'webServerGracefulShutdown' completed its stop procedure
2023-09-06T21:06:18.771Z DEBUG 118 --- [ecutor-thread-1] o.s.c.support.DefaultLifecycleProcessor  : Stopping beans in phase 2147481599
2023-09-06T21:06:18.796Z DEBUG 118 --- [ecutor-thread-1] o.s.c.support.DefaultLifecycleProcessor  : Bean 'webServerStartStop' completed its stop procedure
2023-09-06T21:06:18.796Z DEBUG 118 --- [ecutor-thread-1] o.s.c.support.DefaultLifecycleProcessor  : Stopping beans in phase -2147483647
2023-09-06T21:06:18.797Z DEBUG 118 --- [ecutor-thread-1] o.s.c.support.DefaultLifecycleProcessor  : Bean 'springBootLoggingLifecycle' completed its stop procedure
[2/2] COMMIT springboot
----

> The debug output from the Spring Framework shows the `Lifecycle` beans in the application have been stopped in order to prepare for the checkpoint. At this point you have an application container image called `springboot` that can be run to restore the application process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The debug output from the Spring Framework shows the `Lifecycle` beans in the application were stopped to prepare for the checkpoint. At this point, you have an application container image called `springboot` that can be run to restore the application process.
```

=== Building with Docker

At this time, Docker does not allow you to grant the container image build engine the Linux capabilities necessary to perform an application checkpoint.  This prevents you from running the `checkpoint.sh` script doing the `docker build` command. Instead, you need to use a link:https://openliberty.io/docs/latest/instanton.html#three_step_process[three step approach]:

1. Build the application container image without the InstantOn layer.
2. Run the application container to perform a checkpoint of the application.
3. Commit the stopped container with the checkpoint process data into an InstantOn application container image.

> The three build steps can be done by running the script link:https://raw.githubusercontent.com/OpenLiberty/guide-spring-boot/cracSpringBoot/finish/scripts/build-instanton-docker.sh[`scripts/build-instanton-docker.sh`]. The resulting output is similar to the checkpoint during the Podman build. You will notice some debug output from the Spring Framework for the lifecycle beans. At this point you have an application container image called `springboot` that can be run to restore the application process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Complete these three build steps by running the link:https://raw.githubusercontent.com/OpenLiberty/guide-spring-boot/cracSpringBoot/finish/scripts/build-instanton-docker.sh[`scripts/build-instanton-docker.sh`] script . The resulting output is similar to the checkpoint during the Podman build. You will notice some debug output from the Spring Framework for the lifecycle beans. At this point, you have an application container image called `springboot` that can be run to restore the application process.
```

=== Run the InstantOn Spring Boot application

Both Podman and Docker can use the same options to run the `springboot` InstantOn application:

.run-instanton-podman.sh or run-instanton-docker.sh
[source,console]
----
[sudo podman or docker] run \
  --rm \
  -p 9080:9080 \
  --cap-add=CHECKPOINT_RESTORE \
  --cap-add=SETPCAP \
  --security-opt seccomp=unconfined \
  springboot
----

> You can run the above command or run the provided `scripts/run-instanton-podman.sh` or `scripts/run-instanton-docker.sh` script to run the application container image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can run the previous command or run the provided `scripts/run-instanton-podman.sh` or `scripts/run-instanton-docker.sh` script to run the application container image.
```

[AUDIT   ] CWWKF0011I: The defaultServer server is ready to run a smarter planet. The defaultServer server started in 0.277 seconds.
----

Notice the last message `... server started in 0.277 seconds`. The `0.277` second startup time includes the time it took for `criu` to restore the Java process as well as the Liberty runtime to properly restore the runtime state such that it can safely run the application once restored.  Additional debug messages are enabled for the Spring Framework to show the default Spring lifecycle processor restoring the lifecycle beans in the application.  This is a greater than 10x improvement in startup time when compared the original startup time of 5.5+ seconds when not using InstantOn.

== Summary
Open Liberty InstantOn provides a holistic runtime for deploying cloud-native applications with rapid startup. Liberty InstantOn can be applied to applications using open standards, such as Jakarta EE and MicroProfile, as well as Spring-based applications using the latest versions of Spring Boot and Spring Framework that have support for `org.crac`. Applications continue to benefit from the other advantages that the Open Liberty runtime provides, such as:

> 1. Access to the full Java SE platform without compromise. No need to adjust application code to fit into environments, like native compilation, in order to achieve rapid startup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Access to the full Java SE platform without compromise. No need to adjust application code to fit into environments, like native compilation, to achieve rapid startup.
```

> 2. An optimized Liberty runtime that continues to provide top-performing throughput for applications while also using less memory when link:https://developer.ibm.com/articles/modernize-and-optimize-spring-boot-applications/[compared to other runtimes].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- An optimized Liberty runtime that continues to provide top-performing throughput for applications, while also using less memory link:https://developer.ibm.com/articles/modernize-and-optimize-spring-boot-applications/[compared to other runtimes].
```

> 3. Advanced JIT compilation features provided by the JVM, such as the Semeru Cloud Compiler when deploying to the cloud.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Advanced JIT compilation features provided by the JVM, such as the Semeru Cloud Compiler when deploying to the cloud.
```

> 4. Running on a fit-for-purpose runtime that allows you to use only what you need in order to reduce the container image size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Running on a fit-for-purpose runtime that allows you to use only what you need in order to reduce the container image size.
```

> 5. Using the production-ready Open Liberty container images, an InstantOn application image can be built using the best practices for building optimized and secure application images, such as not running as root in the container or running a privileged container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Using the production-ready Open Liberty container images, an InstantOn application image can be built using the best practices for building optimized and secure application images, such as not running as root in the container or running a privileged container.
```
